=== Science-PQ.pdf ===
 
             
CBSE 
ADDITIONAL PRACTICE QUESTIONS 
Science (086) 
Class X | 2023–24 
Maximum marks: 80                                                         Time Allowed: 3 hours 
General Instructions: 
i. This question paper consists of 39 questions in 5 sections.  
ii. All questions are compulsory. However, an internal choice is provided in some 
questions. A student is expected to attempt only one of these questions.  
iii. Section A consists of 20 objective type questions carrying 1 mark each.  
iv. Section B consists of 6 Very Short questions carrying 02 marks each. Answers to 
these questions should be in the range of 30 to 50 words.  
v. Section C consists of 7 Short Answer type questions carrying 03 marks each. 
Answers to these questions should be in the range of 50 to 80 words. 
vi. Section D consists of 3 Long Answer type questions carrying 05 marks each. Answer 
to these questions should be in the range of 80 to 120 words. 
vii. Section E consists of 3 source-based/case-based units of assessment of 04 marks each 
with sub-parts. 
Section A 
Select and write the most appropriate option out of the four options given for each of the 
questions 1 - 20. There is no negative mark for incorrect response. 
Q.Nos. Questions Marks 
1 A single displacement reaction is represented below. 
PQ + R ----> PR + Q 
 
Which of the following is true about the reactants and products? 
Option Type of ion of R in 
product 
Stability of PR as compared to 
PQ 
A cation more stable 
B cation less stable 
C anion more stable 
D anion less stable 
 
(a) A 
(b) B 
1 
 
(c) C 
(d) D 
 
2 Some types of chemical reactions are listed below. 
- decomposition 
- combination 
- displacement 
- double displacement 
 
Which two of the following chemical reactions are of the SAME type? 
P) AgNO3 + NaCl ---> AgCl + NaNO3 
Q) Mg + 2 HCl ---> MgCl2 + H2 
R) CH4 + 2 O2 ---> CO2 + 2 H2O 
S) 2 KOH + H2SO4 ---> K2SO4 + H2O 
(a) P and Q 
(b) Q and R 
(c) R and S 
(d) P and S 
1 
3 Neetu has two test tubes containing dilute hydrochloric acid and dilute 
sodium hydroxide solution, but they are not labeled. 
 
Adding which of the following solutions to the test tubes will help her 
visually identify the acidic and basic solution? 
(a) only vinegar 
(b) only baking soda 
(c) only sodium chloride 
(d) either vinegar or sodium chloride 
1 
4 Sonia has aqueous solutions of three salts, sodium acetate, sodium chloride 
and ammonium chloride in three test tubes. The test tubes are not labeled. 
On checking, she finds the pH of the solutions to be 4.6, 7.0 and 8.9. 
Which of the following correctly matches the salts with their respective pH? 
 pH 4.6 pH 7.0 pH 8.9 
A sodium acetate sodium chloride ammonium chloride 
B sodium chloride ammonium chloride sodium acetate 
C ammonium chloride sodium acetate sodium chloride 
D ammonium chloride sodium chloride sodium acetate 
(a) A 
(b) B 
1 
 
(c) C 
(d) D 
 
5 Galvanisation is a process of coating iron articles with a layer of zinc to 
prevent the iron from rusting. 
The iron is protected even if the zinc coating is scratched and iron is 
exposed. 
Which of the following is true about how zinc prevents the rusting of iron? 
P) A galvanised iron article does not undergo oxidation. 
Q) The zinc coating prevents contact of iron with air. 
R) Zinc undergoes corrosion more easily than iron. 
 
(a) only P 
(b) only Q 
(c) only P and Q 
(d) only Q and R 
1 
6 During purification of a metal by electrolysis, what happens at the negative 
electrode? 
(a) Metal ions lose electrons to become neutral atoms. 
(b) Neutral metal atoms gain electrons to become ions. 
(c) Neutral metal atoms lose electrons to become ions. 
(d) Metal ions gain electrons to become neutral metal atoms 
1 
7 Metals are lustrous and shine especially when their freshly cut surfaces are 
exposed. 
 
Salma cut pieces and compared the lustre of the freshly cut surfaces of the 
following metals. 
aluminium, sodium, copper, iron 
 
The freshly cut surface of which of these metals is likely to lose its lustre 
first on exposure to air? 
 
(a) aluminium 
(b) sodium 
(c) copper 
(d) iron 
1 
8 Which of the following statements is TRUE about the uptake of water in 
plants? 
(a) It occurs all the time due to diffusion. 
(b) Water enters the roots due to osmosis. 
1 
 
(c) At night when transpiration is low, roots do not take up water. 
(d) The movement of water from roots to leaves is bidirectional. 
9 Oxygen saturation levels refer to the extent haemoglobin is bound to 
oxygen. As altitude increases, the atmospheric pressure decreases. 
 
Which of the following graphs correctly represents the oxygen saturation 
levels as altitude increases? 
 
 
(a) P 
(b) Q 
(c) R 
(d) S 
1 
10 Which of the following method/s are useful to prevent fertilisation even 
when ovulation occurs? 
P) surgical blocking of the fallopian tube 
Q) copper-T 
R) oral pills 
S) condom 
(a) only P 
(b) only Q and R 
1 

 
(c) only P, Q and S 
(d) only Q, R and S 
 
11 In cattle, having horns is a recessive trait (h) to not having horns (H). When 
cattle with horns are crossed with cattle that do not have horns, the number 
of offspring having horns was equal to those not having horns.  
Which of the following is MOST LIKELY to be true? 
(a) Both parents are homozygous dominant. 
(b) One parent is homozygous dominant. 
(c) Both parents are heterozygous. 
(d) One parent is heterozygous. 
1 
12 Patient X was suffering from a pancreatic condition due to which the 
pancreas was not functioning adequately.  
Which of the following is a doctor likely to suggest to such an individual? 
(a) including a large amount of protein in the diet 
(b) eating a diet with low-fat content 
(c) eating only carbohydrates 
(d) including only liquid foods 
1 
13 When an object was kept at position X in front of a concave mirror, an 
enlarged and virtual image was formed.  
Which among the following identifies 'X' correctly? 
 
(a) anywhere between the centre of curvature and principal focus 
(b) anywhere between the pole and principal focus 
(c) exactly at the centre of curvature 
(d) exactly at the principal focus 
1 
14 The face of the moon that is visible to us is called as the near side and the 
face of the moon which is invisible to us is called as far side.  
What colour would the sky appear to an astronaut standing on the "far side" 
of the Moon and why? 
 
(a) blue, as the Moon's atmosphere scatters sunlight just like Earth 
(b) white, as the Moon's surface reflect all the light that falls on it 
(c) black, as there is no atmosphere on Moon to scatter sunlight 
(d) black, as sunlight does not fall on the far side of the Moon 
1 
15 Plants receive energy from the Sun which they utilise for several processes. 
 
The energy utilized for which of the following plant processes gets 
transferred to the next trophic level that consumes plants? 
1 
=== Mathematics-PQ.pdf ===
   
   
 
 
 
  CBSE 
ADDITIONAL PRACTICE QUESTIONS  
MATHEMATICS STANDARD (041)  
Class X | 2023 –24 
 
Time allowed: 3 Hours                                                                         Maximum marks: 80 
 
General Instructions: 
 
1. This Question paper contains - five sections A, B, C, D and E. 
2. Section A has 18 MCQs and 02 Assertion-Reason based questions of 1 mark each.  
3. Section B has 5 Very Short Answer (VSA)-type questions of 2 marks each. 
4. Section C has 6 Short Answer (SA)-type questions of 3 marks each. 
5. Section D has 4 Long Answer (LA)-type questions of 5 marks each. 
6. Section E has 3 case based integrated units of assessment (4 marks each) with sub parts of the 
values of 1, 1 and 2 marks each respectively. 
7. All questions are compulsory. However, an internal choice in 2 questions of 5 marks, 2 Qs of 3 
marks and 2 questions of 2 marks has been provided. An internal choice has been provided in the 
2 marks questions of Section E. 
 
SECTION A 
(This section comprises of Multiple-choice questions (MCQ) of 1 mark each.) 
 
Serial 
No. Question Marks 
1 Which of the following could be the graph of the polynomial? 
(x - 1)2(x + 2)? 
 
1 
   
   
 
 
 
(a) 
  
(b) 
  
 

   
   
 
 
 
(c) 
 
 
(d) 
 
 
2 The lines k1, k2 and k3 represent three different equations as shown in the 
graph below. The solution of the equations represented by the lines k1 and k3 is 
x = 3 and y = 0 while the solution of the equations represented by the lines k2 
and k3 is x = 4 and y = 1. 
 
1 

   
   
 
 
 
  
Which of these is the equation of the line k3? 
 
(a) x - y = 3 
(b) x - y = -3 
(c) x + y = 3 
(d) x + y = 1 
 
3 What is/are the roots of 3x2 = 6x? 
 
(a) only 2 
(b) only 3 
(c) 0 and 6 
(d) 0 and 2 
 
1 
4 The coordinates of the centre of the circle, O, and a point on the circle, N, are 
shown in the figure below. 
 
1 

   
   
 
 
 
 
 
What is the radius of the circle? 
 
(a) √0.4 units 
(b) 2 units 
(c) 4 units 
(d) √42.4 
 
5 ΔPQR is shown below. ST is drawn such that ∠PRQ = ∠STQ.  
 
 
(Note: The figure is not to scale.) 
 
If ST divides QR in a ratio of 2:3, then what is the length of ST? 
 
(a) 
10
3  cm 
(b) 8 cm 
(c) 12 cm 
(d) 
40
3  cm 
1 
6 Two scalene triangles are given below. 
 
1 
